Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. Philip Jose Farmer has been a mainstay
science fiction writer since 1952. He has written over 40 novels and over 80
short stories focusing on a wide variety of subjects. These range from Tarzan to
the afterlife, from sex-crazed aliens to a star-faring Catholic priest. Farmer's
most famous works are the Riverworld series, the World of Tears series, his
erotic fantasy novels, and the story, later a novel, The Lovers. We asked Farmer
how he started writing science fiction. I started reading science fiction when I
was seven years old. I'm 63 now. And I knew I always wanted to be a writer,
although I didn't do much about it for many years. The funny thing is, I
actually intended to become a mainstream writer, that is, to write stories which
are not in particular genre. But I somehow or other just drifted into science
fiction and sold my first science fiction story in 1952. That was called The
Lovers. It was a novelette which was published in a magazine, and it's generally
credited with breaking the taboo against the mature use of sex in a science
fiction magazine. We asked Farmer if he consciously set out to break taboos by
writing The Lovers. No, I had an idea for a story, and I couldn't write it
unless I broke the taboos. I didn't really consciously set out to do it because
I had the idea, and I thought it was terrific. On the other hand, I knew I was
going to have a lot of trouble getting it accepted. I did. I did have a lot of
trouble. The first editor I sent it to, John Campbell, who was the editor of
Astounding, was the most prestigious and the highest paying market. So
naturally, I sent it to him first. And he returned it with a comment that
nauseated him. So I sent it to Horace Gold, who was editing Galaxy, which was
equally prestigious and had about the same word rates. His comments were
something like John Campbell's. So then I sent it to Samuel Mines, who was
editor of a magazine called Startling Stories. And he immediately accepted it
and knew it was a revolutionary breakthrough. I published it, and I was on my
way. Except that the next story I wrote was also equally revolutionary, and it
took me a year before I could get anybody to accept it. Farmer is also
interested in religion in its varied forms and has used it in his works. My
interest in religion has manifested itself throughout all my works. Although a
lot of people, when they say the name Farmer, immediately think of sex in a
book. But the fact is I've written much more about religion than about sex. Or
sometimes both at the same time. But in some respects, sex and religion are two
sides of the same coin. In certain fields of activity.
But religion is only one of many themes. Farmer feels that he may have labored
in relative anonymity for years because his writings are so varied. But he has
his reasons. One of the reasons I've had trouble in the early days, I think,
really becoming identified and getting a band of followers, is that I didn't
beat on just one or two drums. I ranged all over the field. But I find out that
if I do a variety of stuff, I don't get tired. Each new novel is a new
challenge. I'm not just working the same old theme again. Tomorrow we continue
with more on Philip Jose Farmer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And David Crews. We're continuing our interview with Philip
Jose Farmer. We want to explore here some background related to one of Farmer's
major themes, religion. As Farmer allowed earlier, he considers himself a writer
of religious themes, even more so than a writer of sexual themes. His own
religious background is quite checkered. I was sent to Sunday school when I was
very little, and I became interested in the Bible, and I read it on my own. And
I even read the Book of Mormon when I was about nine years old. And I always
wrestled all my life with the problems of immortality, predestination, grace,
the afterlife, and all that sort of stuff. I was raised as a Christian scientist
up until the time I was about 12. And then I was sent to a Presbyterian church
where
there was a conflict between Christian science and the Presbyterian idea of
predestination. And then when I was about 16, I guess I became an atheist. Now
I've gone through atheism through agnosticism, and then I was converted to the
disciples of Christ. And then I backslid to go from grace, as the theological
term goes. And then I lapsed back into agnosticism. And what are Farmer's
present beliefs? My present situation is that without immortality, life has no
meaning. And if there's a creation, there must be a creator. But I've become
tremendously interested in what is sometimes referred to as mythicism. It isn't
really like the Muslim Sufism school.
than a lot of related stuff like that. You might say right now, I'm in a sort of
a limbo. Heading toward something, I don't know what. The concept of an
afterlife appears repeatedly in Farmer's works. Well, if you think about it,
there could be a million different possibilities in an afterlife if there were.
But one of my perhaps unstated themes is that immortality may not depend upon a
supernatural being. It's in the evolutionary drive of man for him to invent
immortality himself. The drawback to that is that those people who are already
dead will remain dead, right? So that doesn't correspond to the religious idea
of immortality, where everybody is raised from the first human being to the last
one. I like to do a lot of variations on that. I have a new book called The
Unreasoning Mask. That's a quotation from Moby Dick. And this is concerned with
theology, afterlife, immortality. You might call it a philosophical-theological
space opera.
Many of Farmer's first works had the central theme of religion. The Lovers and A
Woman a Day deal with a future amalgamation of church and state called the
Sturge. A popular character, Fr. John Carmody, is a planet-hopping Catholic
priest who has appeared in several short stories. We learn about his former life
and conversion in the excellent novel, Night of Light. Inside Outside is a wild
tale about the afterlife and immortality. It is in fact the predecessor to the
famous Riverworld series, which we will discuss in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. Having looked into Philip Jose Farmer's
feelings on religion and immortality, we began a look today at the Riverworld
series. Farmer explains the basis of the story. It concerns the planet in which
there's a 10 million mile long river which follows the valley. And everybody
that lived from about 150,000 B.C. to about 1983 A.D. was resurrected along the
banks of the river in rejuvenated form. Looks like there were 25. And the main
mystery behind the whole thing was why were all these people resurrected?
Who did it and how? But the Riverworld concept is so big that Farmer has
managed only to scratch the surface in the four main novels of the series. There
are so many themes that I wanted to explore during the course of those four
novels, but I couldn't do it because I would have slowed the story down too
much. It would have taken too many sidetracks, you might say, and I'd still be
working on that particular series. What else is left? Listen to Farmer as he
gives us an inkling of what he would like to cover. I didn't go into any detail
on how you could work out viable societies with people from every place and
every time. I also wanted to bring up in depth what would happen to famous
people on that planet. Like, well, there's Karl Marx, for instance. What would
he think of what happened to his ideas about communism on the planet Earth after
he died? Leonardo da Vinci, his ideas about art, plus the fact that he's on a
planet where there are very few pigments available, for instance, for him to
paint. What would he do there?
I also wanted to bring
up various figures from science and the military and philosophy and so forth,
show what they would do there. Now, one of the things about the river world was
that, although you were resurrected there in a youthful body of your own, as it
was at 25 or earlier, if you died before 25,
if, for instance, you were 83 when you died, and when your mind is still 83 and
you have 83 years of experience on Earth behind you, now, is your character
formed? Are you going to go through perhaps a thousand years being the same
person? Or are you going to improve? And is the magic labyrinth the last word on
the river world? I made a lot of people mad at me because of that last sentence
or paragraph, I should say, that I wrote in the magic labyrinth. Everything
seems to have been settled. Everything has been cleared up. And then one of the
characters, the kind of minor one, Peter Jairus Frigate, he's celebrating with
the others in the misty tower when he thinks he hears a footfall outside in the
hallway. Goes out, comes back, says to the others, I didn't see anyone. It must
have been my imagination. A lot of readers got mad at me because they thought,
oh, no, he's going to write another one. He's leaving a loophole. Well, I am
leaving a loophole, and I don't know whether I'll go through it or not. But it's
quite possible that the magic labyrinth wasn't the final one in that series
before, that everything that our protagonist learned and everything that
everybody else learned is completely untrue or half the truth. So the river
world novels may or may not be finished, but we do have some more sidestream
stories to anticipate. More on Farmer tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And David Crews. Our show today continues the discussion
with Philip Jose Farmer. A major incident in Farmer's career began when Venus on
the Half Shell, a novel written under the pseudonym Kilgore Trout, appeared in
the pages of fantasy and science fiction in late 74, early 75. Of course,
Kilgore Trout is the creation of author Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. The character Trout
is an impoverished, underappreciated science fiction writer who appears in a
number of Vonnegut's novels. We asked Farmer if he identifies with Kilgore
Trout. I was a fan of Vonnegut. I liked all his books, but Kilgore Trout really
turned me on because his early experiences, as a matter of fact, his later ones,
too, were like a lot of my early experiences, and a lot like the experiences of
many other science fiction writers back in the old days when they weren't being
paid much and science fiction was looked down upon. And we were being taken due
to our inexperience by various publishers and agents. Also, I had a tough time
getting any recognition. So, I guess that's why I identified with him, plus the
fact he's a great character. Vonnegut did not appreciate the reviews given Venus
on the Half Shell, either pro or con, because most of the reviewers approached
the work as if Vonnegut were the author. This cost Farmer the opportunity to
write another novel under the Kilgore Trout pseudonym. I don't know what his
reactions are to the novel itself, but so many people thought that he'd written
it, that he would tell you hundreds of maybe thousands of questions, and then
the reviews came out. Some said Venus on the Half Shell by Kilgore Trout. It was
the worst thing he'd written, and others said it was the best thing he'd ever
written. When I applied for permission to write The Son of Jimmy Valentine,
which I really would have loved to have done, because I could have had a lot of
fun with it, he said no, which is his prerogative. We asked if The Son of Jimmy
Valentine was Kilgore Trout's one erotic novel. It was his, uh, not only his one
and only specifically erotic book, it was also his only non-science fiction
book. Farmer obviously enjoys writing about fictional authors, who in turn write
about their own fictional authors, and so on. Listen as he describes what
writing as Kilgore Trout started. In the Venus on the Half Shell, the
protagonist, Simon Wagstaff, had his favorite science fiction author. Just as in
the Vonnegut books, Eliot Rosewater thought that Kilgore Trout was the
greatest living writer, you know, in any field. He should have been president of
the U.S. He couldn't solve all the problems. Well, anyway, in Venus on the Half
Shell, Simon Wagstaff liked to read the science fiction works of a fellow called
Jonathan Swift Somers III, and I describe his various works, or outline them,
and give the title. But Jonathan Swift Somers, who's a fictional author, wrote
about a giant German shepherd police dog whose IQ had been raised to about 200
in a laboratory, and he became a private detective. Now, I plan eventually
someday on writing a book by Ralph Von Valvao, this dog, under the name of Ralph
Von Valvao. And then maybe I'll end the cycle by having Ralph Von Valvao write
about a human named Vonnegut, something like that, and completing it, going
right back to Vonnegut again. Farmer conceded to the extended family group
called the Wold-Newton family, in which many great historical and fictional
characters are descended from the Scarlet Pimpernel. Thus, Kilgore Trout is
related to Sherlock Holmes, Doc Savage, Sam Spade, and James Bond, among others.
We will look into this aspect of Farmer's writing some more tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. This show will conclude our interview with
Philip Jose Farmer. Yesterday we discussed Farmer's penchant for writing under
pseudonyms. As it turns out, this practice has a very desirable side effect.
Well, that happened to me once. I never thought it would. I thought I was immune
to such a thing. But it did. And after wrestling for two months and getting no
place, I had an idea. I sat down with the typewriter and wrote a story not by
Philip Jose Farmer, but by David Copperfield, they say. I don't remember which
particular nom the clue might be. The story poured out. Very good. I thought so,
anyway. When I'd completed that, the writing block was gone. See, I wasn't
writing then as me, so as a Farmer, but as a Kilgore Trout. And I was in his
shoes. I had no trouble. Now, the funny thing about this is that the, it's a
psychological trick that I'm conscious of, see. And yet it works. It's not like
I'm trying to trick my unconscious, but I must be doing it one way or another.
Well, I don't know if anybody else has ever broken a writer's block in that
manner. But I recommend trying it. Farmer has also written several books
featuring Tarzan or Tarzan-like characters. Tarzan Alive is Tarzan's biography.
The erotic novel A Feast Unknown and its clean sequels The Mad Goblin and Lord
of the Trees feature thinly veiled versions of Tarzan and Doc Savage. Lord
Tiger, the Opar books, and The Adventures of the Peerless Pier also have Tarzan
-like protagonists. We asked Farmer when he developed his interest in Tarzan. I
first read Tarzan when I was about seven or eight years old. And I became
wrapped up in an early age with the works of such Edgar Rice Burroughs.
And, but when I started college, I kind of lost interest and didn't read them
anymore.
But later, Farmer picked up on Tarzan again. This time, he saw Tarzan in a
different light. I started reading books about Tarzan again. And this time,
although I still kept a lot of my childhood interest in him, a sense of wonder
about him, I began seeing things in Tarzan, for instance, that I had not seen
before. He was not just a child who'd been cast away and raised by great apes
and then become a creature of the jungle and then return to claim fortune. He
was sort of an archetype of many, many heroes from classical myth. And now, I'm
sure that when Burroughs wrote this, he didn't know what he was doing, but he
did it unconsciously. I think that the creation of Tarzan is a stroke of genius.
Burroughs is not a great writer, but he has, he has a great character, just like
Acorn and Doyle. He's not a great writer, but he created a great character.
Sherlock Holmes. Philip Jose Farmer, an author with a seemingly endless supply
of unique ideas, who appears just now to be gaining widespread acceptance.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.